---
title: Pattern, Code and Algorithmic Drumming Circles
author:
  - name: Alex McLean
    affiliation: Research Institute for the History of Science and Technology, Deutsches Museum
    email: alex@slab.org
  - name: Renick Bell
	affiliation: Independent
	email: renick@gmail.com
abstract: |

  A report on Pattern + Code, a project working with primary school
  children to explore codes through both textiles and musical code,
  creating an audio/visual installation and live performance. The
  project came in three parts: *Knot Coding*, hiding messages in
  string, inspired by Andean Quipu, *Algorithmic Drumming Circles*,
  live coding percussive, cyclic music in groups of eight, and finally
  a live coding quartet performance. The paper concludes by
  considering how knot coding and live coding could be brought
  together in the future.
  
fontsize: 11pt
geometry: margin=2cm
fontfamily: libertine
fontfamily: inconsolata
mainfont: Linux Libertine O
monofont: Inconsolata
bibliography: references.bib
...

# Introduction

This project was developed and executed by myself (Alex) during an
arts residency in collaboration with primary school pupils, resulting
in an art installation for the Playgrounds exhibition in Sheffield,
Yorkshire UK. I chose the theme *Pattern + Code* for the activity and
installation, a continuation of my interests in understanding coding
through both traditional and contemporary cultural practices. I wanted
to bring together two activities: *knot coding* inspired by the
ancient Andean practice of Quipu [@urton_inka_2017], and contemporary,
collaborative *live coding* musical practice [@collins_live_2003].

I worked with two classes full of Y4 (8-9 year old) children on the
installation. In addition I worked with three Y8 (12-13 year old)
pupils for more focussed work leading to a group performance. Ten days
were available to develop the whole activity.

In the following section I will briefly introduce knot coding, before
describing the activity that is the focus of the present paper,
algorithmic drumming circles. I will conclude by reflecting on these
activities, and how I plan to bring them closer together in the
future.

# Knot coding

Quipu is the ancient pre-Columbian practice of recording information
using yarn, used in the Andean region to keep records during the Inka
empire [@urton_inka_2017]. This practice did not survive the Spanish
conquest, and the Quipus that remain have only partially been
decoded. We do however know that a decimal system of knots was used to
record numbers, and that other information was recorded with binary
properties such as the spin direction of yarn, the orientation of
hitches, as well as the colours of threads.

Inspired by the earlier work "Coding with Knots" by
@rohrhuber_coding_2017 in exploring Quipu through visualisation and
sonification, I worked with Y8 children in Wybourn Community Primary
in Sheffield, on hiding messages in knots tied into yarn. The aim was
to get the children thinking about how information can be represented
using discrete (i.e., digital) knots in string. My motivation was to
introduce digital art in a way that was grounded in human cultural
practice, rather than contemporary demands of the information economy.

The first step was to make Quipu-like strands to work with. This
involved taking a length of alpaca wool, tying a lollypop stick to one
end, and standing on the stick while twisting the other end. When the
twist in the wool gets tight, the two ends are brought together (i.e.,
the wool is folded in half), and the twist in the wool causes it to
'self-ply', i.e. twist back on itself to create a new thread that is
around half the length and twice the thickness. Importantly, the
strand is not only thicker, but has a loop at one end where the
original thread was folded in half. In Quipus, this loop is used to
hitch one strand onto another, creating a non-cyclic tree structure of
main cord, pendant strands, sub-pendants and so on, the structure of
which can be easily adjusted later.

Having each created a Quipu-like strand to work with, we then looked
at how Inka Quipu-makers recorded numbers with knots. Being a decimal
system, knots are arranged into units, tens, hundreds and so on up the
strand, with one being a simple overhand knot (or figure 8 knot in the
unit position), and other numbers represented by the number of turns
in a "long knot". 

The children were then set the task to hide messages in string, given
additional ready-made Quipu-like strands to work with as well as
elastic bands and beads. After a half-day session with each class, the
resulting works were hitched on to a single main cord, creating a
Quipu-like structure for the exhibition, shown in Figure 1.

![Quipu-like structure created with Wybourn Community Primary pupils. Photo (c) Jon Harrison.](images/quipu-harrison.jpg)

# Drumming circles

Working with Quipus set the scene for the focus of the present paper,
live coding. I was faced with the challenge of working with two
classes full of children, over two days. I wanted to work with small
groups, but it was important for the harmony of the school that no
children were left out, so this meant having seven sessions of eight
children, over the two days available. I formed a plan to get the them
live coding together in collaborative "Algorithmic Drumming Circles".
I had used this term for collaborative live coding workshops with
adults before, but wanted to take it further, seating the children in
a circle and making the connection with traditional drumming circles
more explicit.

With the tight time constraints of my residency, I did not have a
great deal of time to research the background of drumming circles. I
had participated in them before in family festivals in the UK, and
looked into the structure of rhythms from different parts of the world
as part of the development of TidalCycles. However, I do not have
great insight into the history or development of drumming circles,
beyond having a vague idea that they had emerged from the African
continent. However images that turned up from an internet search,
turned up images predominantly appearing to feature white people. This
led to niggling doubts about whether I was engaging in cultural
appropriation, which I was already concerned about during the
Quipu-inspired work described above. At the time I put these thoughts
to one side, but later remembered that @chicau_circulo_2018 had
earlier brought the topic of drumming circles and live coding together
in their collaborative piece *Circulo e Meio*. I will now pass the
keyboard over to Renick Bell, to relate some of the research into
drumming circles done during this collaboration with Joana Chicau.

While the subject of drum circles is vast, a sense of it can be gained
through a rough survey of existing research. Drumming in circles
rapidly increased in popularity in the late 1950s in New York City
[@jottar_central_2011, p. 9], and though some people claim that drum
circles have their origins in the West [@spiro_what_2013], the
practice of drummers arranged in circles or semi-circles can be found
in many places including, broadly speaking, Africa
[@blench_reconstructing_2004; @gerstin_tangled_2004], and to specify
by country or region, Brazil
[@williams_short_2015; @sybert_taiko_2014], Burundi
[@slachmuijlder_rhythm_2005], the Carribean [@gerstin_tangled_2004],
Ghana [@greco_emic_2014, p. 111], Korea [@lee_encounters_2013], Japan
[@vogel_transmission_2009]. The practices described arise long before
the 1960s and sometimes have ancient origins
[@slachmuijlder_rhythm_2005]. The intentions in the drumming, such as
involvement of entire community in shared experience
[@greco_emic_2014, p. 109] may differ from those of the stereotypical
western drum circle, but according to this research such an
arrangement of percussionists is neither uniquely western nor modern.

These contemporary Western intentions include group entrainment
[@hart_mickey_2013] and protest
[@johnston_public_2011; @tancons_occupy_2011; @jottar_zero_2009]. It
is now also practiced as recreation and used as a form of music
therapy with purposes including reducing worker burnout
[@bittman_recreational_2003] and delinquent youth rehabilitation
[@bittman_creative_2009]. Some practitioners are keenly aware of the group
dynamics and ethics involved in how to participate [@hull_unwritten_2011].

Back in the voice of Alex, the following section will look into the
practicalities of bringing algorithmic drumming circles into a primary
school workshop context.

# Algorithmic drumming circles

By chance, the children of Wybourn community primary had already
partipated in drumming circles with real drums earlier in the school
year, and so were familiar with the concept of playing rhythms
together. They were on the whole less familiar with coding, although
perhaps the earlier knot coding activity gave them some ideas about
discrete representation and pattern.

Each group of eight children was arranged in a circle on the floor,
each child with their own computer and speaker. They used the
TidalCycles [@mclean_making_2014; tidal for short] live coding
environment to make music together. Each session only lasted one hour,
during which I gave them a short presentation on the practice of both
drumming circles and live coding, teached them how to live code with
tidal, and recorded a drumming circle performance for the
installation. Despite the apparent impossibility of this task, in two
cases there was time to record two performances to include in the
exhibition. Some sessions could not be recorded due to lack of
parental consent, and in the end five recorded performances were kept,
of around 10 minutes each. For safeguarding reasons I am not able to
share these videos online, but here is a link to a drumming circle
with six adults, to demonstrate how the system works:
[https://photos.app.goo.gl/HKKvexgiXXdcvwa18](https://photos.app.goo.gl/HKKvexgiXXdcvwa18).
g
## Hardware

Eight Raspberry Pi computers (version 2) were used, with high quality
audio outputs from Phat DAC add-on boards, and 7" screens donated by
sponsor Pimoroni. In addition eight speakers (four pairs of Fostex
PM0.3d) were used, with a speaker placed under each computer and
screen, creating an eight-channel drumming circle where each pupil
could hear their own contribution clearly. I had originally planned to
use cheaper Pi Zero Ws, but could not obtain them in time for the
workshops, and had ready access to Pi 2s. The computers had keyboards,
but not mice.

In order to support accurate time synchronisation and tempo
coordination, and take a live backup of the children's code, an
ethernet network was used. As well as recording the code, a high
definition video recording was taken of the circle from the top-down
by Jon Harrison, by fixing a camera with wide lens to the ceiling. The
camera also took an audio recording for reference purposes. Rather
than recording the eight-channel audio, keypresses by the children
were recorded so that they could be replayed, thereby reconstructing
the audio perfectly.

## Software

I used the *TidalCycles* environment, with a newly developed, tightly
integrated text-based editor *FeedForward*, written in the same
language as TidalCycles; Haskell. This project gave significant
impetus to develop this editor so that it was stable enough for use by
eight year olds. In the event, the children were the first people to
use it aside apart from myself. Feedforward features include automatic
labelling of separate patterns (so the usual `d1`, `d2` functions are
not required), so that individual pattern can be easily muted and
unmuted with hotkeys. Furthermore, each pattern is given a VU meter,
giving a visual cue of the audio produced by it.

Importantly for this project, FeedForward records keypresses with
accurate timestamps, allowing performances to be recorded and played
back with very high precision, and minimal space requirements. These
data were sent over the network to my laptop, so that they could be
stored together for later processing, and also as a live backup.

I also added software features to TidalCycles itself in the form of
the optional `Sound.Tidal.Simple` module, mainly to reduce the amount
of typing needed to make live music, to a level acceptable to
non-touch typists. This involved developing Tidal's overloaded string
feature, so that a sequence will default to being a pattern of
sounds. This is in addition to automatic inference of separate
patterns, so rather than typing `d1 $ sound "kick snare"` for a
minimal kick-snare pattern, only `"kick snare"` is required. 

I also added a number of shorthand pattern transformation functions to
`Sound.Tidal.Simple`, which all take a single pattern as input and
return a pattern as output. These additional functions are listed in
the below table:

name       effect
---------- ----------
`crunch`   apply bit crush
`scratch`  chop each sample into 32 grains and play them backwards
`louder`   increase the gain
`quieter`  decrease the gain
`mute`     replace the pattern with silence
`jump`     skip forward in time by a quarter cycle
`higher`   increase playback rate
`lower`    decrease sample playback rate
`faster`   increase sample playback rate and play the pattern faster
`slower`   decrease sample playback rate and play the pattern slower

I have since found myself using these 'simple' features during my own
performances.

As well as the above unary pattern transformations, I also introduced
the children to two of Tidal's higher order functions, `every` and
`sometimes`. Even these two functions ad a great deal of variety to
the overall rhythm, allowing them to patterns such as `every 3 faster
"hi*2 ~ lo lo"`. I also showed them how to add additional
transformations on top, such as `sometimes crunch $ every 3 faster
"hi*2 ~ lo lo"`, explaining that the `$` operator is used for 'glueing
together' transformations.

## Instruction and sound

I had a few different approaches to the drumming circle to try out
with the first couple of groups of children (who did not have parental
permission for filming). For example, I had printed example patterns
onto stickers, which I stuck onto playing cards, and then dealt out to
the children. These stickers had different colours to denote whether
they were drum pattern sequences, or functions to transform those
sequences.

However, it quickly became clear that any such intervention was a
distraction from what is most important in a drumming circle: trying
things out, listening to each other, and responding. So rather than
handing out cards, I simply showed them how to make pattern sequences
and transformations on-screen, and gave them time to experiment with
each example hands-on. 

I gave each child only two samples each, named `hi` and `lo`, to
denote the high and low tone of many hand drums. Each child had a
different pair of sound samples, taken from a variety of hand drums,
to help them differentiate their own patterns from those of the rest
of the group, creating a rich percussive emsemble. My original
intention was to use these at the beginning, but then give them
additional sounds to play with, printed on cards. However as mentioned
earlier, I found limiting the children to only two sounds each
provided constraints leading them work creatively with the patterns.

# Installation

The installation was live during the week-long Playgrounds exhibition
in Millennium Gallery in Sheffield, taking place as part of the
Childrens' Media Conference. As shown in Figure 2, the computers were
set up on the floor of the exhibition, as they were in the school,
only without keyboards, creating a non-interactive installation. The
videos originally taken from a camera attached to the ceiling in the
school were projected back onto the computers from a projector
suspended above, so that ghostly images of the children could be seen
moving around and working at the computers. Their keypresses were
simultaneously replayed in synchrony with the video, so visitors to
the exhibition could see the children, see what they were typing, and
hear the rhythms produced from the code they were typing from the
individual speakers. The knot-coded quipu-like structure was installed
next to the drumming circle, with photographs of the children making
them. Small booklets were made explaining how the project worked, and
its motivations.

![Algorithmic drumming circle installation in-situ, showing video and on-screen code playback of the children working, which was synched with the audio. Photo (c) Jon Harrison.](images/drum-circle-harrison.jpg)

The projection could have been a little brighter, and the acoustics of
the room a little dryer, but in my opinion the children made amazing
music, and this came through well in installation form. The children
themselves visited the gallery, and reports are that they
enthusiastically enjoyed re-watching their drumming circles (and
stepping on each other's projected forms).

# Live performance

I also worked with three older pupils, this time 12-13 year olds from
Crofton Academy school in Wakefield, also in Yorkshire UK. This was in
collaboration with the Wakefield sensory support service there, with a
view to exploring tactile interfaces to live coding through
participatory design, but the visual impairments of the participants
was not a factor in the present project. We had around five hours of
learning and practice over two sessions together, allowing a much
wider exploration of Tidal's functions and sounds. We also recorded
new sounds for the children to use. I joined them in the performance,
forming a live code quartet, to a large audience, the majority of
which were pupils from another local primary school. The young live
coders did brilliantly, causing the whole audience to spontaneously
stand up and dance.

# Conclusion

This project was developed as an arts residency, and no attempt was
made to evaluate it as a piece of research at this stage. The
eight-year olds were not surveyed for qualitative or quantitative
responses, however they all engaged fully with the activity
throughout, and to my own ears, the musical results were great,
fluctuating between polyrhythmic grooves and extreme noise, with each
drumming circle group having a distinct musical character. It was
particularly good to see children at several points hear something
interesting one of their friends was making, run round to have a look
at how it was done, and then run back to try it out themselves.

Further development is ongoing towards a follow-on installation. As
well as having more time with future groups, and I am particularly
keen to make the next iteration interactive, providing an additional
computer or two allowing visitors to join in with the live code being
played back. I have plans to work with another school in the region,
but am also keen to work with adult and family groups. The first of
these will take place at RODEO festival of dance and theatre during
October 2018, where some visitors will work on algorithmic drumming,
while others will control dancing robots created by Dave Griffiths.

More fundamentally, I am keen to explore how Quipu-like textile
structures could be used as an interface to live coding. Both Quipu
and computer lanugage is structured as a syntactical tree, and being
able to describe computational, musical patterns through such textile
structures appears to be an area ripe with possibilities. It is easy
to forget that historical technologies such as Quipus perished through
external factors and not necessary through any lack. The practice of
quipu-making was developed and refined over a far longer period than
contemporary silicone-based technology, and so we must surely a great
deal to learn from it.

# Acknowledgments

Many thanks for collaborators who made this installation possible,
including Jon Harrison of Lovebytes, Julian Wood of Wybourn Community
Primary Sheffield, Jane Sharp of Crofton Academy Wakefield, Sharna
Jackson, Darren Chouings and Kathy Loizou of Playgrounds, Laura
Feltham and Rosie Eagleton of Museum Sheffield, and the good people of
Access Space.

The arts residency and Playgrounds exhibition was funded by Arts
Council England. Part of this work was conducted by the PENELOPE
project, with funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under
the Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme of the European
Union, grant agreement No 682711.

# References
